Mollib 1.0 release notes
========================

*Aug 13, 2017*

Version 1.0 of mollib is the first release. This page documents the changes
and features available in this version.

Compatibility
-------------

Mollib ver 1.0 is compatible with Python 2.7 and 3.3+.

Requirements
------------

- numpy
- scipy

CLI Features
------------

The command-line interface (CLI) includes a series of plugins for processing
and analyzing molecular structures.

--------

process
^^^^^^^

- The :ref:`process-command` plugin is used to read molecular structures and
  modify them.

- Currently supports the loading of protein databank
  (PDB) files as well as the fetching and caching of PDB files from the
  internet.

- The hydrogens plugin (``--hydrogenate``) is included to strip and replace
  hydrogen atoms in a molecule. The topology of protein molecules are included
  and the ``CONECT`` topologies in PDB files are supported.

- Individual models or many models can be selected.

--------

measure
^^^^^^^

- The :ref:`measure-command` plugin is used to measure interatomic distances,
  angles and dihedrals in molecules.

- Statistical summaries of measurements are available with the ``--stats``
  option.

- Ramachandran angles are calculated with the ``--rama`` option. The
  Ramachandran angles include secondary structure assignments based on the
  backbone dihedral angles and hydrogen bonding pattern, like DSSP.

- Statistics on the frequency of the observed Ramachandran angles for the given
  secondary structure type are provided. Statistics are calculated from the
  highest resolution structures from the PDB. (Unique structures with
  resolutions between 0.5-1.6ł observed R-factors better than 0.25 and free
  R-factors better than 0.30.)

--------

hbonds
^^^^^^

- The :ref:`hbonds <hbonds-command>` plugin is used to measure and rate amide
  and aliphatic hydrogen bonds in structures.

- Hydrogen bonds are classified based on backbone torsion (Ramachandran)
  angles and the acceptor-donor position in the primary sequence.

- Statistics on the frequency of observed hydrogen bonds, based on their
  interatomic distances and angles, are provided. Statistics are calculated
  from the highest resolution structures from the PDB, where hydrogens were
  added with the hydrogens plugin. (Unique structures with resolutions between
  0.5-1.6ł observed R-factors better than 0.25 and free R-factors better than
  0.30.)

--------

pa
^^

- The :ref:`pa <pa-command>` (partial alignment) plugin is used to fit residual
  dipolar coupling (RDC) and residual chemical shift anisotropy (RACS) data of
  biomolecules using a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).

- Supports the refinement of sum couplings, like those of methylenes, with the
  ``#`` wildcard operator. ex: 'CA-HA#'

- Supports the refinement of multiple molecular structures simultaneously with
  one dataset.

- Includes detailed statistics on the fit for each type of interaction.

- Identifies outliers based on Grubbs tests.

- Includes 'fixers' to find and fix errors in the sign of RDCs and RACS as
  well as the exclusion of outliers.

- Reads data from mollib partial alignment files (``.pa``), NMRPipe DC input
  files and magnetic resonance data in Xplor-NIH format.

- Supports the automatic fetching of magnetic resonance data from the PDB.
  (i.e. ``.mr`` files) However, only residue numbers are read in at this time.

- Currently includes CSA tensor data for the backbone H, C, and N atoms of
  proteins. Other nuclei can be easily integrated through a settings file.

- Supports methyl RDC data that have been projected onto C-C (or S-C) bonds,
  as used in Xplor-NIH.

- Weights the contribution of RDCs and RACS based on relative errors. If errors
  are not specified, default errors are used from the settings.

- Pre-calculated dipolar couplings can be used from the settings, or dipolar
  couplings can be calculated from the bond lengths and gyromagnetic ratios
  of the spins from an interaction.

- Interactions are identified using an abbreviated syntax. For example,
  ``14N-H``, ``A.14N-H``, ``14N-14H`` and ``14N-C-1`` are all valid identifiers.

- Alignment files with multiple alignment media datasets can be selected with
  the ``--set`` option.

API Features
------------

The API has the following features and updates.

- *Testing Framework*. A testing framework that uses pytest, tox and a CLI
  tester.

- *CLI Tester*. The CLI tester is located in the ``tests/cli`` directory, and it
  is invoked by typing ``make test-cli`` in the root project directory. It is
  also included in the tox tests under the ``cli`` environment.

- *Plugin Framework*. A plugin framework to add and remove functionality. The
  base Plugin is located in the ``plugins`` folder.

- *Settings Manager*. A settings manager to dynamically change settings from the
  command line or through configuration files.

- *Optimized Functions*. Optimized (Cython) functions to calculate the length of
  vectors and to find atoms within a distance cutoff located in ``mollib.core``.

- *Statistics Plugin*. A statistics plugin to calculate statistics and datasets
  over high-resolution structures.
